## Is there a data science bubble?

Over the past decade and a half, data science has taken off. From sabermetrics to advertising to healthcare, industries are turning to data science to solve their key business questions. Industries are seeking answers and making substantial investments to get them. This investment and the rapid growth of data science leads to one question: is there a data science bubble?

The term data science came about in the early 2000s and has widely gained popularity since 2010. Technology made capturing and storing data easier than before. As the data keeps piling up, businesses are looking to gain value from assets. This need helped create demand for a new specialization, one that would combine statistical expertise, computer science and technological interest, and knowledge of a specific domain. This specialization is what became known as data science. The increased demand has led to an explosion of the data science field. Colleges and universities have created areas of study focused on data science. Employers have hired data scientists and are now employing them full time. These newly trained and newly employed people are now creating tools to help them complete the tasks at hand.

As the community of data scientists has developed, so have the tools to support its community. Websites and online communities such as Kaggle have been created to allow people from inside and outside the community to collaborate, discuss, and share new ideas on the topic. The adoption of open source principles and technologies have allowed data scientists to create and share tools to help other data scientists do their jobs. Massive open online course (MOOC) offerings such as Coursea and edX have lowered the educational barriers and allowed current professionals with an interest to join the data science movement. These tools provide a foundation for data science to be sustained through adoption into the business mainstream.

Can data science as a field be sustained in the future? The rapid expansion of the data science field leads some to believe it may collapse under its own weight. However, technological advances easing data collection. Personal devices (e.g. cell phones, activity trackers, and other wearable technology devices) are helping create a data-centric world. With data more readily available, the ability to interpret and gain insights from this new source will remain valuable. On the other hand, it is unlikely that current hiring trends will continue. Although hiring may slow, the tools and ideas created during this recent high point are likely to remain. The methods of collaboration and sharing utilized during the recent past will allow professionals outside of the data science community to implement data science concepts. The end result will be data science becoming a more mainstream focus of businesses and industries in the future.

Healthcare is currently undergoing a data revolution. New policies under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) have put data at the forefront. Provider payment restructuring has led to more pay-for-performance arrangements. These arrangements will leverage data in order to quantify the value of healthcare provided by an individual provider. Wearable technology is allowing for patient data to be collected around the clock and with increased granularity. The allows patients and their healthcare providers access to information to track their day-to-day health. Mining this information is likely to uncover new trends and help with early detection of healthcare problems.

The growth of social media during the tail end of the last decade has created new data sources. Many of which have value to a variety of industries. One in particular is the advertising technology industry. This industry will be able to utilize data captured by social media applications to understand consumer response allowing more personalized and relevant advertisements to be displayed. Furthermore, data can be captured to understand the effectiveness of advertising campaigns. In order to answer these questions, the industry will rely upon data science principles.

The data science field has exploded for the duration of the past decade. This extreme growth has furthered the interest, investment, and awareness of data science. While the current level of growth is unlikely to continue indefinitely, open source technologies will allow for the ideas and developments of this data science bubble to be utilized in the day-to-day operations of business people everywhere. The growth of the bubble may slow, but the ideas from it will continue to impact businesses in the future.
